---
layout: post
title: "The enduring quality of the cube"
categories:
  - article
tags:
  - retro
  - geekery
---

Our family owned a Rubik's cube in the 80s when I was a kid. I liked to play
with it, but only got as far as completing one coloured face and one layer of
correct colours. As far as solving it, we didn't have the book that explained
the process, and the web wasn't around in those days, so I'm not sure if any of
my siblings ever solved it. If I ever found it in a solved state, it was
probably as a result of some dismantling and reassembly (followed by vehement
denials), or perhaps after the teen youth group had convened at our house -
which is also how our Rubik's snake got broken. My dad fixed it, albeit with
one piece missing.

The cube has remained a cult icon in nerdy circles and online communities, but
in recent years has been more widely represented in mainstream popular culture.
At the same time, the popularity of speed-solving championships has grown, with
the current world record standing at [under 4 seconds](https://www.rubiks.com/en-us/speed-cubing).

![Cubes](/assets/images/cube.jpg){: .centre-image width="450px"}

{: .image-caption}
*Rubik's cube and a magnetic Moyu RS3M*

My wife bought me a Rubik's cube a few years ago as a nerdy stocking-filler
type novelty present. It sat on my desk at work alongside a load of other geeky
paraphernalia. I never got round to learning to solve it until, during the mass
home-working event of 2020, I went to retrieve a few personal items from the
office, and slipped it into my bag with the intention of learning it as a good
lockdown activity.

![Cubes](/assets/images/cubetoot.png){: .centre-image width="450px"}

{: .image-caption}
*Publically committing to the effort*

From various YouTube videos and websites, I determined that the Beginners
Method was the approach I needed. I got to work, concerned that my brain capacity
might not be quite what it once was. I needed to make plenty of notes, and a
cheat-sheet to make headway with this.

![Cubes](/assets/images/cubestudy.png){: .centre-image width="650px"}

{: .image-caption}
*Copious note-taking*

After a couple of weeks of practising a little each day, I had gone from zero
to a point where I could now complete the cube in just under 5 minutes, without
notes (most of the time). After a while, my youngest child expressed an
interest, and using my cheat sheet, and a little tuition, picked it up very
quickly - learning directly from someone else is definitely a faster route.
This was followed shortly afterwards by their sibling. We finally completed the
set when my wife said she wanted to learn too.

A bit of competition spiced things up a bit and now I'm clocking in at under
1min30s and considering where I can make efficiencies without having to learn a
new method - I'm not sure I am ready to commit to that workload right now. I
picked up a speed cube which was much more forgiving, since it had magnetically
assisting turning. We now have a "slow cube" and a "fast cube", which adds a
significant handicap in head-to-head races.

It's quite a feat to have made a puzzle that has such longevity, which rewards
effort so well. Long may it continue. 
